### What's New in Google Accessibility

Large emphasis on on-device machine learning

* Live captions -- they now use AI to get non verbal things too (e.g. "[screaming]", "[laughing]"), not just spoken words 
* [Lookout](https://support.google.com/accessibility/android/answer/9031274?hl=en) ai improvements
* Talkback: It provides an AI image description when no image alt text is provided
* Chrome: when you are in Reading mode, chrome will soon be able to read it out to you, similar to what Firefox and Edge have
* Over a billion users of Android enable text magnification 
* Autogenerated captions in Google drive: the workplace admin has to turn this on, we should check if Princeton has turned it on 

### 40 Years of Adaptive Tech, What Does the Future Hold?

Presenter: Maxwell Ivey from The Accessibility Advantage

This was a cool presentation, the presenter talked about various technologies he has used over his life and in his business and entrepreneurship.

Technologies for reading books:
* Magnifiers, then the Kurzweil reading machine which was "as big as a washing machine", then the NLS Talking Book Machines (originally cartridges)
* Audiobook publishers are becoming more likely to push their audiobooks to NLS right away now, rather than having a delay

* 1990s: a screen reader for DOS
* Did a travelling business, but only had a desktop at that time.  Windows laptops at that time couldn't run JAWS!  Taking reams of notes in braille on braille paper.
* Macbook with voiceover built-in to the OS was a great improvement.  Updating OS didn't mean you need to pay for new JAWS or new hardware
* He created business websites, created [the blind blogger](https://theblindblogger.net/)
* OrCam: wearable accessibility
* Dot 3 braille watch, when there was a notification, he could find out what it was about without headphones or somebody telling what it was.  Refreshable braille has come a long way!
* Wearables that don't rely on consistent internet connections will be very promising
* Alexa -- very cool and very useful, but the accessibility information about devices that you connect with Alexa isn't readily available
* Autonomous vehicles
* How does Braille fit into the future?  Importance of Braille as a foundational form of communication that other forms of communication are based on.  And Braille is having a renaissance.  Braille will become more and more important, not less.
* Wordpress: has been using it since 2012.  It is becoming less and less accessible after the introduction of Gutenberg and full page editor.  It is pushing blind entrepreneurs to other platforms. Often easier to work with HTML directly rather than Wordpress.
* Accessibility is good for your business!
    * Accessibility features make things better for your UX for everyone (curb cuts, talking gps, dark mode)
    * better for your SEO (google and bing prioritize accessible results)
    * Hire people with disabilities if you want creative genuine people on your team!

### Practicing Accessibility Research with Confidence

Presenter: Kavana Ramesh from Fable

[Slides](https://share.interfree.ca/app/open/59gSnit3Xq7-CgjJUEbdL6K-4ziwMbQbu7t-54pJtv82iyt?view=1)


#### Why inclusive research?

To move beyond mere compliance, making sure the experience is good, we need to do inclusive research

Inclusive research requires "perspective getting" directly from the user rather than "perspective taking" (imagining what the user's perspective is)

#### Worrying about getting it right

* can reflect a negative societal perspective about disability: preferring ignoring people with disabilities to engaging with them with the possibility of making a mistake
* Imperfect inclusive user research is much better than no user research
* Don't get stuck in the planning, analysis paralysis stage!
* A way to build confidence: do a watch party together with your team

#### Good practices

Assistive technology users are the experts on their AT.  Allow AT users to explain the expected behavior, any barriers encountered.  At the start of a session, ask the user to give an introduction to how they use the AT (even ask them to go to a totally random page and describe how they use it).

Make sure protocol is adaptable:
* Be flexible!
* If the user is getting distressed, maybe stop doing the tasks, take a break or pivot to a 1:1 conversation

Small sample sizes work well for accesibility research

Measuring the time spent on the task is not meaningful in accessibility research, the pace for navigating a task can be very individual.

Think about your research goals -- use that to determine your priorities in the session, what is less important and can be skipped/replaced with something else.

Empower users to be critical!

> AT users are often very tolerant of poor experiences, so empower them to be critical by validating their feedback and probing further.

Running into a blocker doesn't mean that learning is blocked!  Then pivot to investigating together to really understand the blocker.

Be proactive in asking probing questions about how the experience was for the user.  Perhaps they have been using a lot of mini-workarounds that we as researchers will not notice, but would have otherwise caused them to quit.  Some ideas:
* Was that a typical navigation experience for you?
* If you think of a best-in-class navigation experience for this type of interaction, how would you compare this?
* Is this better or worse than similar interactions on other websites.

Set expectations at the start of the session:
* "If you've tried everything you'd like to for a particular task, let me know and we can talk it through instead."
* "It's okay if we don't get through all the activities today… it will be helpful to capture when things don't work too"
* Reiterate these expectations throughout
* These can be very helpful, especially if the system is so inaccessible that the user is blocked or getting distressed

#### Fable-specific info

* If you need help coming up with a protocol -- or have other questions about accessibility research, you can book a 30 minute session with their UX researchers.  It does not count as a slot.
* After the session, if you want to learn how to fix something, you can book a 30 minute session with the technical team.
