# Rust conference \- remote \- 2025

## 9/3/2025

[Schedule](https://rustconf.com/schedule/#wednesday)


###  From Blue Screens to Orange Crabs: Microsoft’s Rusty Revolution 9:15am to 9:45am

* Move Windows from C++ to rust.
  * Performance improvements
  * Focus on self-contained components of Windows that have had a lot of security problems
* Rust in Windows Kernel
  * New implementation of GDI region (core component currenlty shipping officially in the windows system) in win32kbase\_rs.sys.
*  Deterministic and controllable bugs
* MIMIR semantic indexer and search. Multi-tier index for meaningful information retrieval.
  * [DiskANN](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN) provides approximate closest neighbor solution for large scale
  * Imported DiskANN to rust.
  * The compare of the rust and c++ \-\> accuracy is better for the same amount of time you are on the query. Performance also is better.
*  Concurrency correctness is a benefit over typical garbage-collected languages
* Rust in Azure
  * Adoption in critical security components
  * Caliptra is the open source in Rust to collaborate with aws and ..
  * Off load system : ssc where controlled software runs. New agens for boost will be written in rust not C++.
  * Any code that handles untrusted input from users (e.g. handling requests from VMs that users have created) is mandated to be in Rust
  * New agents in rust
  * Hyper-V virtualization stack . Incremental move to rust.
  * Open VMM virtual machine manager started in Rust from the start. Open source in rust and cross platform compatibility.
* [https://github.com/microsoft/rust-guidelines](https://github.com/microsoft/rust-guidelines)
* SymCrypt library rewrote in Rust ([Compiling C to Safe Rust, Formalized](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387263750_Compiling_C_to_Safe_Rust_Formalized))


### Diamond Sponsor Talk 9:50am \- 10:00am

* They showed a nice profiler called slowlana that uses eBPF, but it is not available publicly as open source yet
  * It can give the same memory information as DHAT, but without so much overhead.  It gives a lot of other information too. Compatible with the Firefox profile viewer.


### Rust for AI & Accelerated Computing 10:30am to 11:00am

*  Most ai tools are high-level python with C++ in the back (even CUDA is in C++)
* Rust as an improvement over C++ because it enables fearless refactoring, makes it easier to go from a prototype/research phase to actual maintainable production software
* Better performance \-\> better models.
* Burn is built in Rust.  (3D reconstruction model. Feed it with 2D images and builds 3D model \-\> BRUSH)
* Portability as a goal (including in-browser)
* Definition of neural network: a function that accepts tensors and returns tensors
  * Tensors are mutable (as the system learns)
* Nice examples of Generics, for changing CUDA vs. not-CUDA, Training vs production
* Burn first version
  * Three backends: NdArray, LibTorch, Autodiff
  * MNIST training example
* Burn \- Feature Expansion Phase
* Requirements: Dynamic graphs, shapes, Kernel fusion, SIMD Tensor
* [WGPU docs](https://docs.rs/wgpu/latest/wgpu/)
* Sending to a runtime for execution: this hurts the ability to debug what’s going on.  Instead, Burn uses static graphs for the execution.
* Kernel Fusion reduces the memory allocations, allows more temporary values to be stored in Registers
* [CubeCL](https://github.com/DaveHyperspace/cubecl) allows you to write GPU code similar to how you would write CPU code, and then just add a \`\#\[cube\]\` annotation at the top of your function
* Learning resources:
  * [Burn book](https://burn.dev/books/burn/) , [CubeCL book](https://burn.dev/books/cubecl/getting-started/summary.html), Discord community, Blog posts

### Memory Safety Everywhere with Both Rust and Carbon 11:05am to 11:35am

* [Chandler Carruth 2025 rustconf memory safety everywhere](https://chandlerc.blog/slides/2025-rustconf-memory-safety-everywhere)
* Carbon language: it’s designed to be as interoperable as possible with C++, so that it is easy to migrate an existing C++ project to Carbon for memory safety
  * They described C++/Carbon as like Javascript/Typescript
* This talk is a comparison between Rust and Carbon
  * There are definitely language operability options in Rust already, but they are more low-level

### Rust Against the Odds: Fighting Human Trafficking with Software That Runs Everywhere

* [traffickingfreetomorrow.com](http://traffickingfreetomorrow.com)
* [The case for memory safe roadmaps](https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2023-12/The-Case-for-Memory-Safe-Roadmaps-508c.pdf)
* High trust GUI
* Very responsive
* Opens and closes quickly
*  eGUI
  * Immediate mode
  * Easy to move around
  * No dependencies
  * Lightweight
    * Snappy on thin clients
    * CPU heavy(?)
  * GUI runners up
    * Iced
    * Sveltekit in tauri
    * Dioxus
    * Makepad
    * Slint
  * UX
    * Simple UX for legal users
    * One view
    * GUI as docs
    * 4 buttons
  * Maintenance
    * 1 unit test per module
    * Usually test the pub function
    * One good early benchmark
    * Show progress
    * Find surprising regressions
    * Criterion crate
  * Rust makes weak machines viable
  * Github Actions are a waste if it’s just you
  * Avoid advanced language features
  * Avoid ‘in vogue’ dependencies
  * Future
    * async(?)
    * Mutexes to channels
    * Ripgrep-style directory traversal
    * Truthful progress bars
    * Crash reporter
    * SHA1, SHA256, etc.
    * Network drive protections

### Rust at the Last Mile in Healthcare

Ally Salim Jr @categorically.me

*  The 1st version news to work and works weel
  * Move fast and break thing is expensive and dangerous
* Strong types catch algorithm & logic errors before shipping
  * Makes iteration more pleasant
* Quality libraries & performance by default \=  faster time to deployment
* Examples:
  * Utu Care Blood glucose simulations: Rust & Nim
  * Human state Ontology : going from category theory to knowledge representation
  * ..
* Resumability: Come back to a project and be able to pick it up
  * Library [Flux-rs](https://github.com/flux-rs/flux) enhances the type system
* Quality of Community Projects
* Prototype vs Production
* Portability
* How and When:
  * Clinical Decision Support tools
* Moving forward Tauri:
  * More unified story
  * Smaller binaries and improved performance
  * Increase shared code between platforms
  * React native updates are getting harder

### Memory Safety is Merely Table Stakes: Safe Interactions with Foreign Languages Through Omniglot

* What makes interactions with foreign languages safe?
  * Memory safety
  * Memory safety alone is not a useful property when reasoning about the composition of programs
    Need to insure type safety as well
* Omniglot
  * Creates an isolated area in memory where the library can’t interact with Rust’s memory

### Shipping Rust to Python, Typescript, and Ruby Users

* Why?
  * Creating new primitive types for data science/machine learning
  * Able to create a rust library that could be used in python, ruby, go, or typescript
* Design decisions
  * What kind of API do you want to give your users?
    * Need to design with the users expectations in mind
    * Pure python objects vs rust backed objects will give different errors that python user might not understand
* [github.com/BoundryML/baml](http://github.com/BoundryML/baml)

### Profiling Rust Memory Usage with jemalloc

Presenter: Brennan Vincent

A very good step-by-step walkthrough

### High-Level Rust and the Future of Application Development

Presenter:  Jonathan Kelley

This included a lot of discussion about how to improve rust and the build process to get fast feedback on your changes (not waiting for a long compile).

* [Dioxus](https://dioxuslabs.com/)
  * Very cool demo of hot reloads of changes in Rust code.
  * They had some interesting DSLs using macros.
